so, what are the tools that R comes with
to help you to debug a program?
Right, so there are five basic functions
and a
few associated ones that I want to talk
about.
But the first most basic one is the
traceback function.
Okay?
Now, one thing I want to say, you can get
pretty far in R without using any of these
functions.
I actually, I worked with R for like six
years and didn't even know these functions
existed so, and So, I'm, I'm not saying
that you necessarily have to, that you
will always be using these functions, but
they're actually quite handy in some, some
cases.
So, the traceback function, what does is
it
prints out what's called the function call
stack.
So you know, typically when you call a
function, you call,
you call the function and that function
calls another function, and then
that function calls another function, and
it's like, and then you're four
functions deep, and then maybe the error
happens way down here, right?
And so,
traceback just tells you how many function
calls
you're in and where the error occurred,
right?
And so you can try to identify where
in the sequence of function calls the
error occurred.
Otherwise, all you know is that you called
one function and then an error occurred.
But you've no idea, you know, how many
other functions are called underneath.
So the traceback function will tell you
that, and I'll give you an example.
So the debug function is probably the
handiest function.
It, what it does is
it, as you give it a function as an
argument, and it flags that function for
debug mode.
Okay, what debug means, that anytime you
execute that function,
anytime, anywhere even if another function
calls it, it will, it
will halt, it will suspend execution of
the function at the
first line, and then you can, in what's
called a browser.
And I'll show you how this works and then
you can step through the function
line by line.
And then you can see you can execute one
line,
one expression at a time, I should say
inside the function.
So you can try to pinpoint, okay, if
there's a specific line of code
when the error occurs, you'll be able to
find out which line that is, okay.
The browser function's relativity to debug
in the
sense that you can stick the browser, the
browser, of, of call to the browser
function
anywhere in your code, and then when that,
when that line of code gets hit, when that
browser
call gets hit, the execution of the
function will suspend, okay?
And then you can, and then you can go line
by line from there.
So sometimes, for example, you don't, the
debug function by the, will always start
the, start the debugging, start the
browser right at the top of the function.
But sometimes, you kind of want to run
through the
beginning and then stop it somewhere in
the middle.
And so, so the browser function allows you
to
stick the browser call anywhere in your
code and
then it will run the function up until
that point and then suspend it.
So so that, so there, those two are
obviously related.
The trace function allows you to insert
debugging code
into a function without actually editing
the function itself.
and, and this is handy if you are
debugging someone else's code.
Right, so for example, there's code in the
package or the, and
you can't easily edit the code in that
package, or there's code
in the base R itself or there's you know,
something like that.
And you don't want to go and edit that
code, because you can't find the file, or
whatever.
So, you can use the trace function, just
insert a little snippet of
code, and using that snippet is just a
call to the browser function.
And then and, and then, and then you can
kind of browse through that function, and
then you can turn the trace off, and it's,
and the function's back to normal.
So that, and then the recover function is
the
last function.
It's actually, I should put it up here,
it's related to the traceback.
What recover does, so normally when you
get an
error you get, you usually get a message
saying what
the error was and then the, and then you
get, and then the console kind of comes
back to you.
And then you can start, you can just
enter more commands, you can do whatever
you want.
But execution of that function stops and
you get the console back.
What we were, that's the default behavior.
You can change that default behavior by,
by, by creating what's called, or setting
what's called an error handler.
And recover is an error handler function
which means that any time
you encounter an error, anywhere in a
function, rather than getting the
console back the R interpreter will stop
the execution of that function
right where the error occurred, and will
kind of freeze it there.
And then it will print out the function
call stack, so you'll see how far deep
you're
in, and then you can go, you can kind of
jump
around to the different function calls to
see, and to look around.
Now you're in the browser, and you can
look
around in the different function calls to
see kind of,
okay, what happened here, and happened
here, what did the,
how did data get corrected here and things
like that.
It's a little hard to talk about in the
abstract so I'll give you the example.
So there's also, so these functions kind
of allow you to
pick apart the kind of the details, the
lines of code and
try to figure out, okay, nail down where
exactly the the bug may be.
You can also just put things like print,
and
cat, statements in your code to print out
things.
So if you want to know, well what's the
value of x at line
42, you can just print it out, right, and
then see what it is.
And you can get a lot of mileage out by
just putting in print statements.
The only problem with print statements and
things like that, is that you often
you'll put in like a lot of these, it's a
long piece of code,
you'll put in like 40 print statements.
And then you're like, okay, I'm ready to
go.
And then I go back through and, like,
delete all the print statements.
So that's, that can be a little bit kind
of
a pain, but you know, there's nothing
terribly wrong with it.
Some people I've, I've, that I've worked
with are
actually against, they like, oppose the
use of debugging tools.
I've ever software engineer company many
years ago and there was
an engineer there who was, he, he was
opposed to any debugging tools.
He'd never used a debugger.
All he did was print and you know, print
statements basically.
And because he thought that the use of the
debugger encouraged bad habits, right?
So, what do you, and it's true.
I've seen it happen in other places.
Where you just write some code.
I don't care how it's going to work.
I'm just going to run it.
If there's a problem, I'll just run it
through the debugger.
Right, and I'll just step through line by
line to find out what the problem was.
And, and it encourages kind of a sloppy
code development process because you know
that if there's a
problem you can just step through
execution with the debugger.
And I have to say, that's probably not a
good habit to get into.
It's probably better to think about your
code, write it in, in a
kind of intelligent way and then if
there's a problem resort to the debugger.
But I use the debugger all the time.
I use the browser function, I use all
these functions all the time.
So maybe I just
have bad habits but that, that memory is
burnin'
my mem, mem, burnin' my brain for some
reason.